Is Motorcycle Splitting Safer than Not?

	Our project revolves around this singular question. We split this into 4 separate questions, and this write up aims to show our significant findings for each. We looked at years 2019-2021, using the NHTSA’s FARS crash data, and the IIHS’s motorcycle registration data.

	The first part of this analysis was to look at crash outcomes to determine if lane splitting laws affect the amount of fatal crashes, and the amount of injuries? We organized the crashes into 4 groups: lane splitting legal (legal), lane filtering legal (somewhat legal), not mentioned, and illegal. Then the crash numbers were equalized by the number of registered motorcycles for the respective states. In all of the years that were tested, the fatal crash outcomes found somewhat legal states accounted for 18.1% of all fatal crashes, legal was 21.4%, illegal states at 26.3% and not mentioned states at 34.2%. A group ANOVA test found there was a significant difference in the average number of fatal crashes between the 4 law groups with a p value of 0.00061, which allows the null hypothesis to be rejected with an alpha level of 0.05. Then further individual T-tests found the main statistical difference was the increase of fatal crashes in the not mentioned group with a p value of 0.0060 when compared to the legal group. Meanwhile, there was no significance between the legal, somewhat legal, or illegal groups. Overall these findings suggest that not mentioning lane splitting laws has a negative impact on motorcycle safety, but there are a lot of other factors at play in fatal crash outcomes. Further analysis, found not mentioned states also had a higher amount of  fatal crashes due to drunk driving, accounting for 35.7% of crashes, as well as crashes without a helmet where they accounted for  49%. Therefore, the occurrence of possible confounding variables makes it hard to draw conclusions from these results.

The analysis of the number of injuries  from these 4 law groups saw a similar trend occurring with legal and somewhat legal groups having the lowest amount of injuries, and legal and not mentioned having the highest. However, an ANOVA test ran on these findings found a p value of 0.068, which can not be valued as significant. This indicates that the states where laws allow for splitting to some degree do churn out less crashes, injuries, and deaths, but the significance of this link is inconclusive.

The next part of this analysis was to see if there were other attributes of motorcycle crashes that could be linked towards lane splitting. For example, does motorcycle type affect the safety of a split, and does a rider’s license status play any part? In the majority of crashes we studied, 65% of motorcycles had an engine size of over 750cc. Along with this, the p-values comparing engine sizes small(<350cc), medium(350cc-749cc), and large(>750cc) are all below 0.009. These findings on engine size display a conclusion indicating that engine size has a relation to each other, and in this case to lane splitting as well. Alongside this, around 84% of riders involved in a crash had a valid motorcycle endorsement and a valid driver’s license. This shows that, compared to other statuses of license, these licensed riders take up the vast majority of crashes. So, does this play into splitting? Signs point to yes, but with this alone, it’s hard to say for sure.

	In conclusion, to answer our original question; our data seems to indicate states where lane splitting or filtering is  legal had less fatal crashes and injuries, but not by a significant margin. However there was a significant increase in fatal crashes in states that do not mention splitting. While the results on lane splitting laws are inconclusive, factors such as motorcycle type impacted the number of multiple lane crashes, with large motorcycles being involved in significantly more crashes.
